---
layout: post
title:  "POL 58 Lecture 2 Notes - platform effects"
date:   2020-09-30 21:20:39 -0700
categories: notes
---

*Notes from [Stanford's Continuing Studies POL 58][pol 58] class offered in Fall 2020, lecture 2.*

## Platform effects: filter bubbles, echo chambers, and polarization

### Background

- There is a "formal" relm of politics, and an "informal" realm of politics -> if we don't have elections in a representative democracy, then we don't have democracy; elections are a formal mechanism for registering your vote as a citizen and an obvious form of political participation.  Informal realm of politics is outside of the voting booth, including where voters inform themselves on how to vote, communicate with others to about their interests, engage in dialogue is the public sphere, including the digital public sphere. Informal realm of political participation is just as essential to the health of democracy.

- There are significant advantages to having this public sphere be digital: almost no cost to distributing content has supported a massive democratization of voice. Content is being shared across borders in ways previously considered insurmountable! With no *financial* cost, that is. 

- Arab spring, Umbrella revolution in HK, color revolution, yellow vests movement, black lives matter, #metoo movement, climate action movement were all movements born in the digital sphere.

- What are the informational conditions of a well-functional democracy? How should we think about the production, dissemination and consumption of information, as well as disinformation and propaganda, in a world where the cost to produce and distribute is almost 0?

- The very same forces that connect the world has led to an abundance of content and its global dissemination. Informational glutt has overwhelmed the public sphere and perhaps threatened the integrity of democracy itself.

- The flood of information online has contributed to a "post-truth" politics in which citizens that lack an easy way to sort good from bad information are now newly susceptible to misinformation, disinformation, hate speech, and propaganda.

### What are social media platforms?

- Are they like telephone companies that connect people through pipes / digital connections, not responsible for the content that happens online? Or are they like TV and newspapers, with an editor with norms about what's being published?

- Platforms are not like telephone companies because of the algorithmic curation of speech and content that happens on them. It's not just two people connected, it's also curating how people see information. This is the thumb on the scale for how social media companies produce the informational environment in which we now communicate. We're just beginning to grapple with this new type of tool that social media companies are.

- The promise of social media companies was that they would provide connectivity and democratizing, breaking down authoritarian regimes. This was so firmly believed that social media companies were given a lot of space to roll out with this promise to democratize in its slipstream. There's been a substantial change in narrative in how we talk about social media platforms from a decade ago. Was it a false claim that social media companies have a democratizing effect? Or do they have an erroding effect on democracy?

- From 2011: ["Liberation Technology"][liberation technology], Larry Diamond to 2017: ["Can democracy survive the internet?"][can democracy survive the internet], Nate Persily -- 6 years for this pivot to happen is really fast! ["From liberation to turmoil"][liberation to turmoil]

- Who are the people that don't have access to mainstream media? Progressive voices. These are the people that benefit the most from social media. It allows pro-democracy movements to solve collective action problems.

- The same features of social media that make it a useful tool for pro-democracy forces in authoritarian regimes also make it a useful tool for anti-systemic forces in democracy, and allow them access to communicate, amplify their messages, organize. Authoritarian regimes adapt. The empire strikes back.

- Social media: It's a Tool, it's a Tactic, it's a Territory. Tool (some people just use it to keep in touch with relatives, like a telephone); Tactic (movements use this strategy to get their message across); Territory (governance challenges - if you are in charge of overseeing that territory, you do have the responsibility to ensure the safety and security of those people. A broadcast has public interest obligations. Social media companies dodge those by shifting what they are).

- Josh Tucker, NYU center for social media and politics, social media and political participation labratory. "Social Media and Democracy" book

- Joan Donavan, Media Politics and Public Policy at Harvard, Technology and Social Change project

### Polarization

- `Ideological polarization` - how far apart on the ideological spectrum are people on a particular issue? Eg Weimar Germany had high political polarization, between the communists and the nazis.

- Historical context: in 1960 the President of American Political Science Association Committee called for MORE polarization in the United States because they wanted voters to have more choices. Not enough polarization can be problematic, because parties have nothing on offer to the voters to differentiate themselves. Then why vote?

- `Affective polarization` - how much supporters of one party dislike supporters of another party

- In general, when discussing polarization in politics, usually it is referring to "affective polarization"

- What's happening along wedge issues? How do people decide if they agree on a wedge issue? Usually have to do with "rights, resources, and representation". Social media plays on affect -- "do you like this or not?". When it comes to the design of algorithms, there's a lot to do with forecasting / modeling what people will like or what people will dislike. This removes a lot of opportunities for nuance. Reinforce sticking to your side of the wedge issue, and in contrast have a sharper reaction to things that are not in support of your beliefs. How are people expressing their attitudes and how are they getting caught in some of these filter bubbles that are being reinforced over time?

- Outside the digital sphere, we are geographically sorting ourselves into areas where democrats live with democrats, etc. Sometimes, greatest chance of encountering a different opinion is online.


### The number of people using a technology change its effect

- Network effects, and also...

- Youtube was made to replace with DVD and video cassette dating. You were supposed to upload a video of you describing the love that you seek. It's not like the design of the tech has changed fundamentally, but the users have changed and the use-cases have changed

- More is different -> the more people using a technology fundamentally change its use, even if the technology is fundamentally the same

### Not enough data to govern social media tech

- Governing platforms is tricky, and bad policy can do disproportionate harm. We don't have enough information on what is going on in these platforms to make good policy. If we want to make good policy, we need access to data to be able to understand what is going on in these platforms.

- Of course everyone wants privacy, but access to the data should be expanded to researchers to be used for public benefit, not just for maximizing ad revenue

### Closing thoughts
- `Maximum ad revenue is not the same as maximum democratic benefit`

[pol 58]: https://continuingstudies.stanford.edu/courses/liberal-arts-and-sciences/technology-and-the-2020-election-how-silicon-valley-technologies-impact-our-elections-and-shape-our-democracy/20201_POL-58
[liberation technology]: https://www.journalofdemocracy.org/articles/liberation-technology/
[liberation to turmoil]: https://www.journalofdemocracy.org/articles/from-liberation-to-turmoil-social-media-and-democracy/
[can democracy survive the internet]: https://law.stanford.edu/publications/can-democracy-survive-the-internet/